Well, as I was saying, Mr. Burnett, the whole
community really was ready to pull together, and
they did pull together. They supported the school
and supported us tremendously well. And I might
add, I think our coaching didn't hurt anything,
because for the first time in, I guess, Anderson's
history, we had a winning basketball team and a
winning softball team. We had a good track team,
but our star track man was blind in one eye. And when
they put him in a lane, he would veer across all the
other lanes and invariably become disqualified.
He could run faster than everybody, even though he
ran twice as far, but he never won anything much. So
I enjoyed myself in Anderson. I made many good
friends there. I did a great deal of hunting and
fishing in the community and took part in
community life and community church work. And my
wife and I really, truly enjoyed our four years at
Anderson. I came to Texas A&M University on
November the 1st, 1939. I had not particularly
cared about leaving Anderson unless I could go to a
college or university somewhere because I was
quite happy in Anderson. But a series, a chain of
circumstances made it such that during the summer
I came over to A&M and visited with Dr. George
Summey, who was then head of the English
Department at Texas A&M. Dr. Summey was a close
friend of Dr. LL Click, who was my major professor
at Austin while I was working during the summers of
35, 6, 7, and 8 on my master's degree, which I did, in
fact, receive in English from the University of
Texas in Austin in the summer of 1938. Dr. Click had
told me, if you ever happen to be in College
Station, go by and visit Dr. Summey. He's a fine
man. He and his wife are wonderful people. They are
Virginians. So I was interested and did, in fact,
just drop by to visit Dr. Summey with my wife. And
while I was there, he encouraged me to put an
application with him. He said he had no openings at
the time, but that if one turned up, he thought he
would love to have me, that Dr. Click had written a
very nice letter to him about me, and he was glad I'd
come by. So this was all rather informal and
incidental, and I didn't think much of it. But
after I had started work in Anderson and had worked
for a month, along about October the 27th or 28th, I
got a phone call from Dr. Summey saying that one of
his young instructors had terminated his
contract and that he needed an immediate
replacement and could I come as an acting
instructor in English at Texas A&M University. To
me, this seemed like a great opportunity. And
indeed, after the years have gone by, I will say I
still think it was a great opportunity. And I am
glad that I accepted the job. I had a hard time
talking the school board in Anderson into letting
us both go because my wife, by this time, was
teaching in the grades in Anderson. And they were
rather hard put to it to find a replacement. But
they did feel, I think, that having a teacher there
in Anderson who was hired by a major university
from this small school was a tribute to the school.
And so after some discussion, they agreed to let me
terminate my contract with them and let me come on
over to Texas A&M University. This I did on
November the 1st, 1939, and joined the Department
of English. In those days, A&M was, I must say, not
at all the sort of school it is now. The campus
was... I won't say it was a sea of mud, but there were
very few sidewalks. The winters were very wet and
quite often cold. And one got the impression much
of the time that he was just simply slopping
through mud from place to place, no matter where he
went on the campus. Many of the buildings were
rather old and antiquated as far as heating and so
on were concerned. There was no such thing as air
conditioning and all the comforts that people now
know. And life wasn't primitive. I mean, we
weren't living in tents or shacks. There were some
shacks that we taught in. But nevertheless, it was
a rather small campus. I just remember the exact
enrollment at the time. I would say in the
neighborhood of 6,000, something of this sort.
And naturally, all core members, that is, all
students were members of the core ROTC, with the
exception of a very few people who were
handicapped and could not participate. However,
it was an all male, all core, highly traditional,
small land grant college that I joined as a member
of the English staff. I could talk for a long time
about some of the sort of interesting things that
went on. There was the old Cave of the Winds, which
had something like eight or ten of the young
people, young men in the department, instructors
and assistant professors, had their desks in the
same room. And when each one had a student sitting
in front of him, was trying to go over a paper with
the student, and two were talking, and one was
playing some sort of a recorder, and one was
hammering on the edge of his desk, something of
this sort, it really sounded like the Tower of
Babel. And how anybody got anything done under
conditions like this, I don't know. Still, we did
manage to do the job. I think did a very good job,
really. English department at that time had no
graduate programs at all. We were primarily a
service department. That is to say, we taught the
basic English courses, freshman composition,
logic, which I'm sorry to say has rather
disappeared from the curriculum now. It was a good
course. Both I and my colleagues and our students,
I think, enjoyed course in pure logic.
literature courses of various types, both
American and English literature, and an
undergraduate degree program. But we had no
graduate operation. All of the teachers were
full-time teachers, and most of them were
experienced teachers. And I do think that
this was probably a good thing, because it brought
the students there all under the tutelage of
experienced people who were heavily loaded who
were, however, dedicated to teaching. They were
not concerned with research of any sort because
there was no time for it and really no purpose in it.
And it was a teaching institution so far as the
English department was concerned at that time,
though of course it has changed greatly in the
years that have gone by. Some of the interesting
places that were, that I remember were cases the
little coffee shop down under the YMCA building.
And many of the old Aggies I know will remember
cases where students and faculty alike gathered
for coffee and talk and so on, in a sort of a dim, Ross
Geller on a small scale atmosphere. And the old
Aggieland Inn, opposite, straight across the
street from where Sabisa Hall now stands,
approximately in front of the hospital. Now this
was a beautiful building. And it was also a hotel,
and the only one on the campus. It had rooms for
visitors, not very many rooms. It had a lovely
downstairs coffee shop, and virtually all the
faculty members would go there at some time in the
morning to sit around a big horseshoe-shaped bar
and talk to their neighbors.
The core life was very interesting. rigorous for
the students. I often thank God I had not been an
Aggie student when I would walk by some of the dorms
and literally hear the splat, splat, splat of the
board going on in the corridors. Hazing was
forbidden by regulation, but it was carried on
both considerably and regularly at that time. And
the upperclassmen had many, many traditions and
rules and regulations and restrictions designed
to harden and mold the younger freshmen. I have
never really decided what my opinion of the core
life is. I certainly can see that in many ways it's
valuable on the basis that if a young man could
survive the rigors of core life and did survive
these rigors, Then he felt a sense of courage and
perhaps the ability to survive anywhere. And I
have heard old Aggies say just that. That is, that
simply knowing that they had survived four years
of corps life in A&M and come out perhaps a corps
leader or a staff officer in the corps had given
them the feeling that they could make it anywhere
they went under any conditions. On the other hand,
I have seen. a number of students, good students,
literally ruined by the core life, emotionally
and physically and intellectually seriously
hurt because they were not geared for this sort of
thing and yet were forced into a mold and a pattern
which they weren't fitted for. And some of them, I
have a feeling, never really recovered from the
scars of going through what to them was years of
absolute torture and degradation in the core. So,
like any other human institution, I guess we could
say that the old corps at least had values and it had
serious defects. The corps life has changed a
great deal now and I know very little about it. It is
a relatively small portion of present day A&M life
because it represents, oh, I don't know, not more
than 11 or 12 percent of the total student body at
this time. As I stayed through the 1940s, I might
digress a little to say that I went for a summer or
two to the University of Wisconsin proposing to
work on a PhD degree in English at the University of
Wisconsin. And I had some very fine teachers there
and was enjoying my work. But World War II
interrupted this, and I never went back to work on a
PhD degree. I never received one. In 1941, on July
the 3rd, a very happy and interesting experience
occurred to me. My only child and only son was born.
Well,
he is now Dr. Justin E. Kidd. And much against his
father's wishes, he majored in English at the
University of Virginia, received his PhD in 1973
in English at that fine old institution up in our
home part of the country. And he is now an assistant
professor of English on the staff of Louisiana
State University in Shreveport. I might go a
little further to say that he has two lovely
daughters. My granddaughter is Julie, now age
nine, and Helen, now age eight. And recently, my
first grandson and his first son, Mr. James Edward
Kidd, who, as I speak, is 12 days old, and a very fine
baby as babies go, if I do say so. Well, Justin was
born, and I was coming along in the Department of
English. I had advanced by 19 and 41 to the rank of
instructor, was no longer an acting instructor.
And I had found an interest in radio writing, radio
production. Texas A&M then owned its own radio
station and I worked on a contract basis in
producing, writing and producing a number of
radio series. Some of these were under contract to
the Texas Education Agency. I remember one series
we did was called Jobs Ahead. We did this series of
13 shows per semester, I believe there were 26
shows a year once a week for the long session. And we
wrote the scripts for this. These were career
orientation shows aimed at the high schools and
junior high schools of the state of Texas. And we
dramatized various kinds of careers. And then we
had a little group of students and student wives
and faculty wives and interested students, just
people who were interested in radio. And they made
up our cast, and they were very good. Many of them
have gone into commercial radio and TV work and
have done well. This was an all-volunteer cast,
and I was the director, and we did it all in the old
station and had some very fine times. Another
series that we did was called Texas Turns to
Science, which dramatized recent scientific
discoveries and researches carried on through
the research arm of Texas A&M University. Still
another series, which was very successful, was
called Man to Man. It was a series of 13 shows, I
believe, if I remember correctly, based on
industrial case histories in the field of human
engineering or human relations. The basis for
this was some studies that had been carried on by
the Texas Engineering Extension Service. They
had a number of case histories, problems that had
come up in actual industries and businesses. We
dramatized these and set them in dramatic form and
presented them. Now, all these shows were
presented live over the air. We had something like
40 or 45 stations carrying these shows on good time
and got very good reception from all the series. We
were real proud of our series. This man-to-man
show was extremely successful. As I recall, it was
picked up by a number of the major airlines and some
of the manufacturing companies and others who
bought the tapes to play to their employees and
their supervisors, foremen and what have you. And
we thought this was a good show. I also had got
interested in creative writing and was doing a
little creative writing on the side and was lucky
enough to sell a number of short stories to such
commercial magazines as Field and Stream, Argosy
Magazine, Rod and Gun in Canada, Giant Western,
other magazines of this sort. And I was also
writing some more literary-type short stories,
things which were non-commercial but which were
stories of some literary merit, I guess, because
three of the short stories I wrote received
mention as distinctive American short stories of
the year in the several years of the Foley
anthologies. And some, one of them at least, was
picked up for anthologizing in a anthology of
short stories edited by the late Dr. William Perry
of the University of Texas. And in this anthology,
my story, which was called Low Road Go Down, was in
company with some of the great Texas writers,
Dobie and Gibson and others, Katherine Ann Porter
and so on. And I really felt that this was a major
tribute. This same story was anthologized in a
textbook, which was used as a text in a survey of
literature in a number of colleges and
institutions. And so I did get some literary
recognition from these stories, but after a while
the main played out and I seemed to lose the touch
somehow or other and didn't do much more fiction
writing. I did, however, do a great deal of
contract writing for various agencies here
located on the campus of Texas Forest Service,
Texas Engineering Experiment Station, and other
agencies, and I found I had all the summer work that
I could possibly handle offered me long before the
summers came just to write for various agencies.
World War I was a very sad and agonizing time, and
many of my good friends and fine A&M students died,
and I was saddened with the news of each death My
wife's only brother, my only brother-in-law,
Robert Canterbury, who was also a student at A&M in
his sophomore year when war broke out, went off
with his friends to service, and he was killed
overseas. And the names of all my friends and my
students who died are on the plaque over at the MSC,
and I never passed this without reliving some of
the misery and horror of this time, which people of
this vantage shared. I, myself, thought that I
would go into the Navy. But before my commission,
which was on the way from Washington, could come
through, I was frozen here at A&M and spent the war
years right here teaching mathematics and
elementary cryptography to ASTP trainees, Navy
trainees, and so on. After the war, I continued to
teach and do contract writing. In 1968, I became
assistant to the dean of the graduate college. and
in 1972 became assistant dean of the Graduate
College. My present job is assistant dean of the
Graduate College. I teach two sections of speech
403 in the long semesters and do not teach it all in
the summertime, but devote my time to the work of
the Graduate College. I will say that my work in the
Graduate College, which takes up about really
most of my time, is work which I enjoy perhaps more
than anything I've ever done. It is work of a
general administrative nature. And I work very
closely with Dean George Kunze. And I'm very proud
of our graduate college, of its growth and
development since it became autonomous in 1968
when Dean Kunze took over as dean, and Dean Leo
Berner, and now associate dean. And I joined him as
the three executive deans of the graduate
college. We have a grand staff. It's the finest
group of people anyone could possibly hope to work
with. They're dedicated to the work. They know
what they're doing. Time means nothing to them in
terms of getting the job done. And I think that the
success and growth of the Graduate College, and I
want to put this on record, is due primarily to Dean
Kunze's terrific personal leadership qualities
and his organizational ability. When he became
dean, the work of the Graduate College was a rather
scattered and chaotic sort of thing. Graduate
enrollment was in the neighborhood of 2,000 or
2,100, perhaps not quite that many. But the whole
program was diversified and scattered and not
well organized at all, in my opinion. He brought
organization and order into the whole thing, and
he, Dr. Charles Pennell and Mr. Lester Wood
developed the only computerized graduate
student record keeping system in the nation,
which now carries all of the records of the
graduate college and the individual students
from the moment of admission to the moment of
graduation on the computer. Any student and any
advisor, any member of the graduate faculty can
find out instantly exactly where his student is,
what he's doing, part of the program he is in, when
he may be expected to graduate, what his
deficiencies are, what his financial supports
are, and so on. This system has attracted
nationwide interest. Dean Kunze has several
times been asked to present it before the Council
of Graduate Schools in the United States. And
graduate deans from all over the country have come
here to look at it and to envy it, to be frank about
it. I don't think that there's another
institution of higher learning in this country
which has perfected its computerization of its
graduate student record keeping to the degree
that A&M has under Dean Kunze's leadership and
supervision. And Dean Kunze has been recognized
by the national graduate community for his work
here. He has served on a number of accreditation
teams for the Southern Association of Colleges
and Schools. He's been chairman of these teams,
just recently has returned from a visit of an
accreditation team to an institution in Georgia,
of which he was the chairman of the team. He has
recently been the only graduate dean in the nation
appointed to a blue ribbon federal commission
charged with looking into the issue of
affirmative action in employment among
institutions of higher education in this
country. And his associates on this commission
are such men as the president of Harvard,
president of Princeton, the president of
Michigan State, and other outstanding
educational leaders, both men and women. This is a
very important committee, and it's a tribute to
Dean Kunze that he's been chosen to do this work.
He's a grand person to work with. And believe me, I
feel that A&M is very, very lucky to have him. I
might add he is an ex-Agin, a survivor of the old
Corps. And perhaps he would not share my total
opinions of the Corps. Nevertheless, he's a great
product of A&M. He has his PhD from Penn State
University. Now, Mr. Burnett, this sort of brings
me up to date. If you have any questions you'd like
to ask me in the remaining time, go ahead.
Mr. Kidd, a big change that you saw come to Texas A&M
was coeducation. What are your thoughts on that?
Well, my thoughts, of course, Mr. Burnett, are
that I approve very highly of the coming of
coeducation to Texas A&M University. When I came
here, A&M was, of course, an all-male
institution, and I taught under these
circumstances for a quarter of a century. And I
thought it was a great school. I was fond of the boys
and so on. But I felt also all this time that
coeducation, would in time be inevitable if A&M
were to achieve a true status of major university.
I know there was a great deal of opposition at all
levels, both from the students, from old Aggies,
and from some people who were not Aggies. And
strangely enough, from many women who felt that
this would be a very bad thing for girls to come to
A&M. But the change was made over a period of time.
And with some struggle and distress, And now I
think everybody has accepted it very, very well
indeed. We have something like 7,000 girls and a
fair portion of these in the graduate school. I
teach girls. There are girls in the class with you.
And I will say this, that these girls perform at a
very high level. They are good students. They're
capable. And they are career-oriented in that
sense. I mean, they probably will marry and so on,
but they intend to use what they learn at college.
and to make a career and also to marry and have
children. And I think they're very high quality
people. They're very good people. And I think it's
been very good for the school to have them. And it
has brought an atmosphere of wholeness and what I
would think of as a university type atmosphere to
A&M. And of course, I think it is certainly a major
factor in the recent astounding growth of the
institution. and the development of the
institution is the coming of the girls and women to
A&M, and I'm all for it. Mr. Kidd, just in the three
years that I've been here, I've seen A&M grow just
extremely fast. All the buildings popping up and
the number of students is increasing. What are
your thoughts on this? How big do you think A&M can
get? Do you think anything is suffering because of
its size, or is it improving? Well, so far I think
the programs are good programs, and they're
working. And the proof of the fact that they're
working is that A&M graduates not only are placed
well, that is, they do get jobs and get jobs perhaps
more easily thanks to a fine placement service
than the graduates of many other schools. But the
important thing is that they do well in these jobs.
The history of A&M graduates everywhere is a
history of success by and large. They contribute
well. They're good citizens. They live well. And I
think this is fine. Now, I do think that there
probably is an upper limit to the growth that we can
tolerate because both of space and facilities.
And I don't think that we have the space,
literally, for the necessary labs and the
classrooms and so on. And of course, there is a
point of no return. I don't know just where that
point is, but I do know that The administration and
the Board of Regents are probably taking a very
hard look at the 30,000 figure as a potential
maximum for at least the coming few years. And
strangely enough, I have a feeling we may well
reach that 30,000 figure within the next two or
three years. So I don't know where we go from there.
There are buildings and so forth on the drawing
boards, but it takes some years for them to be
constructed. And I just really don't know what the
upshot will be. I think right now we're in a good
position as far as growth is concerned.
Well, Mr. Kidd, I've been extremely interested in
your talk. I really appreciate your help here in
this project. I'm glad to get it on tape, and it's
going to be some interesting information.
All right. Well, thank you, Mr. Burnett, and I was
glad to help you.